Email Sender Web Application
1. Project Overview

The Email Sender Web Application is a web-based system that allows users to send emails through a simple interface. The application is developed using Java and Spring Boot for backend processing and HTML, CSS, and JavaScript for the frontend.

The system allows a user to enter the sender email address, receiver email address, subject, and message. Once the user clicks the send button, the system connects to the Gmail SMTP server and sends the email.

This project helps beginners understand how web applications work and how frontend and backend communicate with each other.

2. Technologies Used
Backend

Java

Spring Boot

Apache Maven

Frontend

HTML

CSS

JavaScript

Email Service

Gmail SMTP Server

3. Project Structure
mailsystem
│
├── src
│   ├── main
│   │   ├── java
│   │   │   └── com.example.mailsystem
│   │   │        MailSystemApplication.java
│   │   │        MailController.java
│   │   │        EmailRequest.java
│   │   │
│   │   └── resources
│   │        application.properties
│   │        static
│   │            index.html
│
└── pom.xml

Explanation:

MailSystemApplication.java → Main class that starts the Spring Boot application

MailController.java → Handles email sending requests

EmailRequest.java → Model class storing email details

index.html → User interface for sending email

application.properties → Configuration settings

4. Module Description
1. Main Application Module

The main module starts the application using Spring Boot. It initializes the server and loads all required configurations.

2. Controller Module

The controller receives the email data from the frontend and processes the request to send an email using the SMTP server.

3. Model Module

The model class stores email information such as sender email, receiver email, subject, and message.

4. Frontend Module

The frontend contains the HTML page where users enter the email details and send the message.

5. System Working

The user opens the web application in a browser.

The user enters the sender email, receiver email, subject, and message.

The user clicks the Send button.

The request is sent to the backend server.

The Spring Boot application processes the request.

The system connects to Gmail SMTP.

The email is sent to the receiver successfully.

6. How to Run the Project

Step 1: Install Java JDK

Step 2: Install Apache Maven

Step 3: Open the project folder in Command Prompt

Step 4: Run the following command:

mvn spring-boot:run

Step 5: Open a browser and visit:

http://localhost:8080

Step 6: Enter email details and click Send

7. Advantages

Easy to use interface

Fast email sending process

Simple project for beginners

Uses modern Spring Boot framework

Can be expanded with login and database features

8. Conclusion

The Email Sender Web Application demonstrates how a web application can send emails using a backend server. This project helps in understanding concepts like frontend and backend communication, Spring Boot development, and email integration using SMTP.

The system can be further improved by adding user authentication, an inbox feature, and database storage.